Durban- Former KwaZulu-Natal Hawks boss Johan Booysen welcomed the resignation of former KZN National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) head advocate Moipone Noko from her position as NPA head in the North West. He was speaking was on Sunday after the announcement that President Cyril Ramaphosa had agreed to Noko’s request to resign which took effect from March 1. In November last year, National Director of Public Prosecutions advocate Shamila Batohi, backed by Justice Minister Ronald Lamola, requested the president to investigate Noko’s fitness to hold office. This came after the De Kock Report reviewed the authorisations of former prosecutions boss Nomgcobo Jiba and former national NPA director Shaun Abrahams to institute a racketeering prosecution against Booysen and other police officials. While occupying her position as head of the NPA in KZN, Noko dropped charges against Thoshan Panday and called for Booysen to be prosecuted. Booysen said Noko’s resignation comes after the firing of advocate Jiba by the president. He said both Noko and Jiba had been involved in the prosecution of himself and detectives from the Cato Manor Organised Crime Unit. He said it appeared that Noko wanted to avoid the inquiry into her fitness to hold office. The presidency said that the Minister of Justice had informed Noko on February 11 that she should expect to receive a letter from Ramaphosa requesting her to provide written reasons as to why she should not be suspended pending the institution and finalisation of an inquiry into her fitness to hold office. Three days later, Noko requested permission to vacate her office. Booysen said while he welcomed the developments, the NPA was not yet out of the woods as there were others within the organisation who still sought to undermine the efforts of Batohi to restore the credibility of the NPA. He said the Zondo Commission into State Capture had heard evidence in this regard. “It is imperative that these prosecutors are all subjected to inquiries into their fitness to remain prosecutors.” He added that he had opened criminal cases against Noko and others for the failed attempt to prosecute him and the Cato Manor detectives. Noko could not be reached yesterday for comment on her resignation. North West NPA spokesperson Henry Mamothame said the matter was being dealt with by the presidency. The Mercury 