Durban - The KwaZulu-Natal Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) department came under heavy fire from Parliament’s oversight committee on local government for its slow pace in finalising a forensic probe into the Alfred Duma municipality. “As bureaucrats, you have a fiduciary duty to advise principals (MECs) to timeously respond to issues affecting the lives of the people,” Faith Muthambi, the chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta), told acting Deputy Director-General Buhle Ally, who was representing the provincial Cogta department. The presentation related to the state of the family of local municipalities under the parent uThukela District, which include the Ladymith-based Alfred Duma. Parliamentarians heard that the forensic investigation was instituted following public protests relating to poor service delivery and concerns around Mayor Vincent Madlala. “The 106 investigation (in terms of Section 106 of the Municipal Systems Act) was commissioned by the then MEC (Dube-Ncube) and initiated. It has to be finalised in three months. Why has it taken such a long time? Why was it started only after there were public protests,” she asked. “You (Cogta) are the lead department that must comply with the prescripts; that also must assist municipalities to comply. What’s going on here,” lashed Muthambi. “(The investigations) came after public protests, we are told. Is this how we must respond to community issues? Through public protests?” Muthambi asked, as another concern the fact that action to institute the probe was taken as a result of community protests. In response, Ally said a recommendation to add other terms of reference had led to a delay, adding that the probe had since been completed. “It will be presented to the (municipal) council before the end of April,” she said, but failed to respond to the issue of public protests being the push for action. The investigation was triggered by public protests which started after the merger of the erstwhile Indaka Municipality with the former eMnambithi Municipality, which resulted in some service delivery projects that had been in progress in the former local authority to suddenly be frozen. The community also demanded the removal of the mayor, amid allegations of corruption. Meanwhile, members also lambasted the local municipal leadership for failure to account and be responsive to poor service delivery issues. “As members of Parliament, we are community activists as well. We are aware of the issues of poor service delivery on the ground there, but you are not responding to them here. None of the presentations have addressed those issues,” said an irate Hlengiwe Mkhaliphi. She raised concerns about public toilets that were in a state of filthiness and several incomplete infrastructure projects and inadequate consultations with the public on the ground. Municipal manager Sibusisiwe Sixolile Ngiba denied the council leadership applied a selective approach in their responses to the lawmakers. “We responded to issues that were raised in the email to us by honourable members. It is not because we were avoiding other issues,” she said. The Mercury