Durban - The Msunduzi Municipality has bought new guns to replace those which were seized by the police task team investigating politically motivated murders in the province. The guns were seized more than a year ago as it was believed that they may have been used in some of the killings. Msunduzi Mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla said this week that the municipality had purchased new guns. He was responding to questions about what had happened with the seized weapons and when these might be returned. The seizure left municipal traffic officers and security unarmed. As a result, it is understood that traffic officers are said to only work day shifts and allegedly don't conduct by-law enforcements in some areas for fear of their safety. Some opposition parties said the fact that traffic officers stopped working at 6pm was showing in terms of their budget performance. They said in the past the traffic unit had generated close to R17 million of its own revenue, but this financial year, it was projecting a measly R1.7 million. Thebolla said the officers would undergo training before they received the new weapons. “We are going to re-train them and make sure that they are physically and mentally fit to be handling the guns.” Regarding the seized guns, he said the City had not been informed about the progress of the investigation. “We are mindful of the fact that when this investigation started, there were matters of Covid-19 that might have affected the investigation. “We will give the police space to conduct their investigation. We all know the circumstances in this province that led to the police taking those guns,” he said. DA councillor Sibongiseni Majola said they had not been informed of the council's plans to buy new guns. “If they buy new guns, what is going to happen if the  old ones are returned, are they surrendering those that were taken? “We recently held a budget adjustment workshop where I raised the matter of the traffic and security budget, in the previous years they were generating millions of their own money but this financial year they project to make about R1.7 million. “When I raised this with the head of traffic, he said traffic should not be blamed because  it is not their fault,” said Majola. He said traffic officers stop working at 6 pm because they do not have “tools of trade” ( guns) and they are worried about their safety. ACDP councillor Rienus Niemand said they had not been informed about the plans to buy new guns. “That would be disastrous. The frightening thing is that those guns were taken away on suspicion they have been used for political killings. We needed to get to the bottom of that first before we go and buy new guns. “I know that traffic officers refuse to go to certain areas because they fear for their safety and they need guns,” he said. Police did not respond to requests for comment on the state of their investigation or when the guns they seized might be returned to the municipality. The Mercury