Durban - THE Durban e-Hailing Association has raised concerns about the safety of e-hailing drivers in the city and nearby townships. This comes after a 30-year-old Bolt driver was found dead after he went missing on Friday. The association said it had also received reports of drivers being robbed or assaulted. According to private security company Reaction Unit South Africa (Rusa), Ntuthuko Tiny Goba, an employee of the Road Accident Fund in Durban, also worked part-time as an e-hailing driver. Rusa spokesperson Prem Balram said that on the day Goba went missing, he spoke to his girlfriend and informed her that he was on his way to uMlazi, south of Durban, to pick up a client. Balram said Goba’s cellphone had then been switched off. “Goba was driving a silver VW Polo which was recovered the following day in Golokodo, Folweni. The battery, registration plates and licence disc were missing,” he said. Goba’s family identified the body on Monday. KwaZulu-Natal police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala confirmed the incident and said a case of murder was being investigated by Isipingo SAPS after the body was found on Platt Drive in Isipingo Hills. “The victim sustained gunshot wounds to the stomach. The circumstances surrounding the incident are being investigated,” said Gwala. Goba’s mother declined to comment, saying that the family were in shock. “I just lost my son. At this stage, we are hoping that the police will make an arrest soon and while we wait for that, we would not like to say anything,” she said. The Durban e-Hailing Association’s chairperson, Andre de Bruin, said that it was concerning that e-hailing drivers were increasingly becoming victims of crime. De Bruin said that they had received a number of reports of drivers being kidnapped, robbed or assaulted. He said that most of the incidents seemed to occur when a driver was picking up or dropping off a client in a township area. “These incidents do not only happen at night, even during the day drivers are also driving at risk. “The criminals know that at around 10pm, drivers might have more than R2 000 with them, and they see an opportunity to rob them,” he said. He also said car thieves see e-hailing drivers as soft targets to steal their cars and make easy cash. De Bruin said drivers may be forced to stop working at night due to safety concerns. “There are more than 1 000 e-hailing vehicles in the Durban CBD at night, and police can’t escort each car. Going forward, the drivers would be reluctant to work at night and even to respond to requests from outside the CBD,” he said. The Mercury 