Durban - The embattled Msunduzi Municipality has made little progress in turning around its fortunes, and this is evident in the latest assessment by the National Treasury which found the municipality to be in serious distress. The Treasury conducted an assessment of the municipality, paying special attention to institutional set-up, financial health, financial governance and service delivery. It found that service delivery was on the decline, financial governance was fragile, financial health was distressed and institutional arrangement was fragile. However, it said that there were some areas where there had been improvements. The municipality has been under administration since 2019, and this arrangement is expected to be reviewed this month. The Treasury director for local government budget analysis, Kgomotso Baloyi, wrote to the municipality last month, following a meeting with senior management, detailing the findings. On institutional set-up, the report said that while the municipality had filled vacant positions at senior management level which created stability, there were still challenges to fill vacancies at the lower levels due to the municipality’s financial position. The report also revealed that poor contract management at certain business units had resulted in payments on expired contracts. On financial health, it said the financial position of the municipality had slightly improved in 2019/20 when compared with the previous financial year. “However, it is still in a distressed position given the failure to honour financial commitments, especially payment of bulk suppliers. It was indicated that there are outstanding payments to uMngeni Water, while the Eskom account is up to date,” it read. The water debt remains a major challenge, “therefore the municipality is reviewing the indigent register and is considering a fixed rate for those who claim to be impoverished”. The report said the municipality was taking too long, 180 days instead of 30 days, to collect from residents. It said the municipality needed to implement “rigorous credit control and debt collection measures to ensure payment of services to improve cash position”. The municipality was in debt, and outstanding money owed to creditors had increased from R365.4 million in 2018/19 to R722.9m in 2019/20, and was R507.9m at mid-year of the 2020/21 financial year. The letter noted that the political-administrative interface had improved in the municipality. This was evident from council structured meetings where discussions were considered to be mutual and resolutions were secured timeously. ACDP councillor Rienus Niemand said: “The ACDP demands the immediate end of the theft of the municipality’s major trading commodities of water and electricity through the uncompromising implementation of its credit control policy.” DA councillor Sibongiseni Majola, who had seen the report, said it showed the problems faced by the municipality. “You cannot address issues of consequence management when there are several vacancies, when the internal audit which deals with issues of corruption has a 50% vacancy rate.” The Treasury declined to comment yesterday. “The department does not communicate with its clients or comment on unresolved issues pertaining to its clients through the media,” the Treasury said. Municipal spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said the municipality was reviewing the contents of the letter and would provide a detailed response today. The Mercury