Durban - Upper Highway residents have reported an increase in illegal hunting in the area near the Kloof gorge. Shelley Keene, who resides on the edge of the Kloof conservancy area, told The Mercury that she had noticed that on weekends men, armed with weapons, came with dogs to hunt for animals in the gorge. “So far we have seen them kill porcupines, a large spotted genet, hedgehogs and a buck.” Keene said her family became aware of the issue a few years and had reported it to the SPCA. “We reported the matter to SPCA but they said it wasn't their jurisdiction, my husband contacted the Kloof Conservancy and they couldn’t help, we were just informed that it's a complicated matter as they (illegal hunters) hunt for muti, which is part of their culture and that it's such a large area, by the time someone can get to them they would be long gone,” she said. The Keene’s said they had run-ins with the hunter who some times use their property’s fence to corner the animals. “Sometimes they swear at us saying the land belongs to everyone and sometimes they threaten us,” she said. A resident living further down in Botha’s Hill, who did not want to be named for fear of reprisals, said she and her husband were returning home from church late one night when they saw a group of men with a pack of dogs. “My husband, dad and the neighbouring farmer went to try to speak to them because we know they come to hunt the buck but the men and dogs had either run or hidden and I believe this happens often and they also set traps in the area,” she said. DA Ward 10 councillor, Tex Collins said he was aware of the illegal hunting in the area. He said it was a “sensitive” issue as hunting was a cultural practice that had been traditionally passed down from one generation to the next . Collins said the Kloof gorge area, the borders of the Inanda Dam, reserves and bush had become attractive areas for the illegal hunters. “The game is limited and so they hunt small wildlife duiker and hare, porcupine but are probably after bush pigs and duiker. “It happens but is not prevalent, but still a concerning matter. “We don’t have the data to ascertain how much poaching goes on, I’ve seen people walking with dogs along Inanda Dam. “It is not only hunting but trapping that is also concerning,” he added. Musa Mntambo, spokesperson for Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife said there was an increase in illegal hunting inside as well as outside protected areas. He said the increase was first noticed during the early lockdown period last year and public and private game reserves had illegal hunting incidents. Ezemvelo said illegal hunters if caught would be charged in terms of the Nature Conservation Ordinance No. 15 of 1974(42.2). Mntambo said the sentence for contravention of the offence could be up to one year direct imprisonment or five thousand rand or to both such fine or imprisonment. He said while Ezemvelo staff were often intimidated this would not prevent them from enforcing the law. He said the public should report illegal hunting to their nearest police station or any Ezemvelo game reserve. The Mercury