Durban - Professor Salim Abdool Karim, co-chair of the Ministerial Advisory Committee on Covid-19, believes the country is in a better position to deal with the pandemic in the year ahead. Abdool Karim was speaking as the country today marks one year since the first case of Covid-19 was confirmed. The infectious diseases epidemiologist, who is also the director of CAPRISA, highlighted key issues relating to the epidemic at the University of KwaZulu-Natal’s Nelson R Mandela Medical School yesterday. Abdool Karim said 2021 would be a different challenge compared to last year, but he was confident that SA was in a better position to take on the coming year. “I feel the lessons of the past have given us the foundations to deal better with this pandemic in 2021.” Recalling when the first Covid-19 cases were confirmed, Abdool Karim said he had been disturbed and deeply concerned at the time. “Those patients who got Covid-19 were treated like lepers in some instances. People were worried and scared.” At the time, he said the uncertainty and the lack of knowledge about how the virus was transmitted led SA into a situation where many of the first cases faced this problem. Abdool Karim said the first Covid-19 patient, from KZN who tested positive with a mild case of the virus after returning from a holiday in Italy, was very fortunate. He said the doctor who treated patient ‘zero’ had good Covid-19 procedures already in place. “The doctor wasn’t hesitant to see him, care for him, be his doctor and managing him, but some of my other patients, have had this problem.” Abdool Karim added that the first patient gave many people hope. “He got the disease, had it in a mild form and he recovered.” He said if the situation had been different, it would not have set the tone and belief systems that this virus could be managed. “I think for that reason we have his doctor to thank because she did a good job by firstly diagnosing him.” Abdool Karim said he took away five lessons from last year, including dealing with a threat of this nature seriously and timeously. “You have to make difficult decisions bravely because you have to do what’s needed, even if it’s unpopular.” He said truthful and proactive communication was also  important. Abdool Karim said while the Covid-19 response had its challenges and mistakes along the way and had also seen military patrols, irrational regulations and corruption related to the procurement of personal protective equipment, he had also seen what South Africans were capable of when working together. “I firmly believe our future lies in our ability to work together. To understand that to solve this pandemic, we cannot do so if we work in isolation.” Looking ahead, Abdool Karim further explained that SA could expect to be dealing with the virus for a few years unless there were technological advances and ways of dealing with the variant were discovered. He said the variant has shown that as pressure was placed on the virus, it mutated and vaccines were made. The mutation then finds a way to bypass the vaccine resulting in another vaccine being made to deal with the new variant. “It is going to take us a longer period to get to a position where we can live lives in a state of normalcy as best we can.” When asked what the likelihood was that SA would go back into lockdown – with people forced to stay at home –  Abdool Karim said there would be no need because the country now knew what behaviours must be implemented to control the virus. Commenting on his opinion on the ban of cigarettes and alcohol, he said while he saw the reasoning in terms of the virus causing a respiratory disease, there was very little evidence linking smoking and Covid-19. He added that at first, he could not see the link between the ban on alcohol. “By the end of Level 5, when I first saw the evidence emerging, I began to see the importance of the alcohol (ban). Alcohol has nothing to do with the virus, but everything to do with the health system.” The Mercury