DURBAN – The Durban Chamber of Commerce and Industry said it welcomes any efforts to assist small businesses in a “challenging economic environment”. Durban Chamber of Commerce and Industry chief executive Palesa Phili said yesterday the organisation had been engaging continuously with all stakeholders. “We are aware of various relief efforts by the city, particularly in the tourism sector,” she said. The chamber was commenting after the eThekwini Municipality said more than 5 000 small businesses crippled by the Covid-19 lockdown in Durban had applied for assistance from the city’s Economic Recovery Fund The municipality called for patience, saying it was sorting through thousands of applications and was busy with a pre-selection process. The fund application process, which aims to assist small businesses severely affected by the Covid-19 outbreak, closed on September 30 last year. “Following an influx of inquiries from applicants requesting feedback on their applications to the Economic Recovery Fund, the municipality would like to update prospective beneficiaries that the pre-selection phase is still under way but is closer to completion.” The head of the Business Support, Tourism and Markets Unit, Thulani Nzama, said the committee handling the process, which comprised senior executives from the private and public sector, was about to complete the pre-selection phase before it commenced with the selection. Nzama said Covid-19 challenges had delayed the selection process. However, he assured the applicants the committee was working around the clock to finalise the process and award deserving candidates. Phili said the Durban Chamber served on the city’s adjudication committee for informal sector businesses applications for Covid-19 support. This included assisting with the development of the selection criteria and the actual application assessment process. She said the chamber appreciated all efforts made in this challenging economic environment. “Our call would be to encourage the fast-tracked processes to ensure most vulnerable livelihoods get relief. The hard reality is that all business sectors were hard hit by the effects of the pandemic and its consequences, including disease burden and lockdown. “As a result, townships and informal businesses who primarily rely on the downstream benefits of the formal sector were the hardest hit. Many of these rely on short-term cash cycles for their survival, and this disruption of economic activity led to severe financial distress,” she said. thami.magubane@inl.co.za The Mercury