DURBAN - The father of a 17-year-old boy, who was allegedly kidnapped in Newlands East last week, has pleaded with kidnappers to release him. According to police, Mmeli Ngcobo from Castle Hill has been missing since February 22. KwaZulu-Natal police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbele confirmed the incident and said police in Newlands East were seeking assistance from the community to find the teenager. She said that it was alleged that February 17, 2021, Ngcobo had taken a cell phone belonging to his class mate. She said his class mate did not report the incident to the school principal, but instead informed his parents. “The parents then came into the school and approached Ngcobo without permission from the principal and requested that he returns the phone.” Ngcobo was given until February 22 to return the phone. Mbhele said on that day, just after school had finished, the boy was approached by two men in a gold or silver Mercedes Benz. She said it was alleged that Ngcobo was forced into the vehicle. “The vehicle drove off in the direction of Castle Hill Drive. The registration number of the vehicle is unknown at this stage. One arrest has been made in regards to the alleged kidnapping. However, the kidnapped child has not been found.” Ngcobo’s father, Prince, has urged the kidnappers to return his son, even if he was not alive. “It’s been too long now. At least they must return him, dead or alive. The least they can do, whoever took him, must return his body so that we will lay him to rest in peace. This has been very traumatising.” He said he was unable to sleep and the situation was getting worse as the days were going by and there was no update on the whereabouts of his son. The father said he could not even eat. “It’s even hard to put a spoon in my mouth as I don’t know if my son, wherever he is at, has eaten anything or what. This has really traumatised us as the family as we did not expect that by now, he would still be missing.” He said he hoped the community could help find his son. Mbele appealed to anyone who is aware of the whereabouts of Ngcobo to contact the investigating officer, Warrant Officer Denver Ramdhunee on 031 574 714 or 079 696 3706 or Crime Stop on 08600 10111. sakhiseni.nxumalo@inl.co.za The Mercury