Durban - A preliminary investigation into allegations of wrongdoing by the suspended Ezemvelo Board has found that there is substance to some of the allegations made against it. The report also called for a formal investigation to be instituted by an external service provider. There were no details on which allegations have been substantiated. The board was suspended in August last year following allegations of wrongdoing. However, the board might not be in place when the findings are made, as the investigation might be completed after its term of office had already expired. When it was suspended, a source close to the investigation said among the allegations was that the 12-member board, which had been appointed in 2018, had constantly interfered with management decisions, lacked good governance and there were procurement irregularities. After the board’s suspension, Simiso Magagula was appointed as the accounting authority for the next 12 months. During the entity’s appearance before the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) yesterday,  it confirmed that some of the allegations against the board had been substantiated and warrant further investigation. A letter by the current MEC for Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs Ravi Pillay, revealed that a preliminary forensic investigation had found that some of the allegations were credible. “As far as the forensic investigation is concerned, I have been informed by senior officials that the forensic unit  indicated that the preliminary investigation has shown sufficient evidence to merit a formal investigation. “The preliminary report has not been shared with the department and I am therefore unable to share the contents of that report. The external service provider that will investigate the allegations against the board is in the process of being appointed.” DA’s Francois Rodgers said he was not surprised that some of the allegations had been substantiated. “All along, I have been saying that part of the problem was the board,” he said. IFP member Mtomuhle Khawula said they were happy with the investigations. “The matters in Ezemvelo are really concerning and some of the issues there have been going on since 2013.” ANC committee member Sipho Nkosi said they support the investigation and the implementation of corrective measures where wrongdoing is identified. The Mercury  