Durban - Opposition political parties are calling for the KwaZulu-Natal Premier Sihle Zikalala to appoint a permanent provincial MEC for Transport, Community Safety and Liaison, saying the department was too important to be left to an acting MEC. The position has been vacant since the late former MEC, Bheki Ntuli passed away in January this year due to Covid-19 related complications, with KZN Education MEC Kwazi Mshengu acting as the political head of the portfolio. According to opposition parties, Mshengu has his hands full as he is currently occupying two important positions in the province which both require undivided attention. The DA KZN spokesperson on Transport, Sharon Hoosen, said the Department  of Transport and the Department of Community Safety and Liaison were two key departments. Hoosen said the two require a political head who understands the dynamics of these departments and can provide undivided time and attention to make positive changes. She said more work needed to be done, especially in the transport department where its irregular expenditure has increased to R17 billion. “In short, this department is scattered. It deserves an MEC that will provide the necessary guidance and leadership to revive it and recruit people who are experienced to work in this department,” said Hoosen. “There has not been any coordinated approach to build anti-crime structures in key areas. Necessary resources need to be provided to SAPS stations where there has been an increase in priority crime,” she said. “The department has also started to show an increase in irregular expenditure and officials are non-compliant when it comes to following proper processes,” she said. The DA said the appointment of an MEC should have been a priority to ensure that the needs of the community and service delivery was not further delayed. Inkatha Freedom Party shared the same sentiments, saying the delay could be a contributing factor to the latest escalation of criminal activity in the province. The party’s spokesperson for transport, community safety and liaison, Blessed Gwala, said a full-time, dedicated MEC was urgently needed. “Indeed, the departure of the late Ntuli, who diligently led this department, left a substantial void,” said Gwala, who added that it was careless to leave two crucial departments in the hands of one person. He said Mshengu’s existing portfolio requires much attention due to the adverse circumstances created by the Covid-19 pandemic. Gwala said the recent spate of killings in the province makes it all the more worrying that the department has no captain to steer it. A number of killings have been reported in the province in the past two weeks, including the Eshowe massacre, where a family of six was killed. Furthermore, three police officers were killed in a space of a week in two separate incidents. Speaking to The Mercury yesterday, the KZN African National Congress spokesperson Nhlakanipho Ntombela, said that Zikalala has already started consultations with the party regarding the matter. “It is the Premier’s role to appoint the MEC. The party has met with the Premier and the process is now left with the provincial government head, Zikalala, to appoint,” he said. The Mercury