DURBAN - YET another police officer has been gunned down in KwaZulu-Natal yesterday and while getting away the suspects hijacked and killed a 33-year-old motorist in eMkhomazi. This has prompted a call from the national police commissioner for police officers to be more vigilant in the wake of the “onslaught” on them. According to police, the detective who was stationed at Mkhomazi police station was killed in a drive-by shooting on the M14 Road, Roseneath area. Police declined to name the detective until his next of kin had officially been notified. This comes after Sergeants Makhosaze Mdlangathi and Mfikelwa Mtolo were ambushed and killed in Taylor’s Halt last weekend. They were stationed at the Plessislaer and Richmond police stations respectively. Further, on February 18, Constable Royal Mfihloyakho Ndlovu, 44, was shot and killed while responding to a domestic violence call in Welbedacht, Chatsworth. Police spokesperson Colonel Brenda Muridili said that after shooting the 55-year-old detective, the suspects’ vehicle was spotted by eMkhomazi police on patrol, driving recklessly. “A chase ensued when the police started to pursue the suspects. Their vehicle apparently crashed into a truck during the high speed chase. The suspects got out of their car, robbed and fatally shot a motorist aged 33 before speeding off from the crime scene in the victim's vehicle. A case with two counts of murder and carjacking has been opened for investigation at SAPS Umkomaas,” said Muridili. She said that the 72-Hour Activation Plan was implemented to mobilise all the resources needed, including members from Crime Intelligence, Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation as well as Forensic Crime Scene Management, to investigate this incident. General Khehla Sitole urged police to use their tactical expertise learnt through various training programmes offered to them while on and off duty, especially with the recent surge of police killings. "The commonality of the modus operandi and crime patterns of brutal killing of our police members, as identified, is under investigation to uncover the root causes, which will enable us to investigate and prevent these gruesome crimes from taking place again," said Sitole. Police are appealing to anyone who might have witnessed this incident or any other to call the Crime Stop number 086 00 10111 or send tip-offs on the MySAPS App. Acting Transport, Community Safety and Liaison MEC Kwazi Mshengu said yesterday’s murder required law enforcement authorities to hunt down the “cold-blooded killers”. Daily News