Durban - The KwaZulu-Natal Education department confirmed that another matric marker had died. This comes after the death of a matric marker in Estcourt at the weekend due to Covid-19. The department’s spokesperson Muzi Mahlambi said the female marker was based at a marking centre in the Amajuba district. He said the marker had reported at the centre on January 6 and said she was not feeling well. She was taken to hospital on January 7 and had been in hospital until she died yesterday. The news came as the Basic Education Department moved to assure pupils that the disruption of Grade 12 exam marking due to Covid-19 infections would not compromise the quality of the process or prejudice the candidates. The assurance came after it was reported that 238 markers countrywide had to be replaced after they tested positive for Covid-19. Basic Education Department director-general Mathanzima Mweli and director for Public Examinations Priscilla Ogunbanjo detailed the progress of marking in a media briefing yesterday. Ogunbanjo said the department would ensure a reliable marking process and “pupils will get the marks they are suppose to get”. A report tabled by Ogunbanjo revealed that of the 46 024 appointed markers, 238 had tested positive and replacements had to be brought in. In KZN, the report revealed that 8 730 markers had been appointed, but 110 were withdrawn due to various reasons including that they were exposed to someone who had tested positive for Covid-19. The report said eight markers had to be withdrawn after testing positive for Covid-19. The report said the department had taken steps to ensure the marking process was reliable. It said the reliability and validity of marking due to replacements of markers and other senior staffers was being addressed, with provision made for extra time for training of replacement markers and the deploying of on-site moderators for quality control. The report also touched on the safety of the markers. “While the country is on adjusted risk alert level 3, every effort is being made across marking centres to ensure the safety of the marking personnel. Marking is being conducted under strictly managed conditions that must be compliant with the health and safety requirements,” said the report. The Mercury 