SILINDILE NYATHIKAZI Durban - A THREE-PAGE document called “Project FBI (ANC Friction)” detailing the ruling party's factionalism and secrets in secret meetings is making the rounds on various social media platforms. The author of the document, who named himself only as the “Attendee” at a  meeting, with seemingly no objective of some of the ANC’s top brass at an unknown farm. “The meeting was attended by Zizi Kodwa, Fikile Mbalula, Siphiwe Nyanda, Mo Shaik, Loyiso Jafta of State Security who was brought in by Mo Shaik and Zizi Kodwa, two SSA informers who gave ... all the information to us and one of them is the handler to the other, Neil Barnad the former Apartheid operatives turned SSA operative and 3 Reps one from Mossad and two from CIA and also present and I was also surprised was two reps from New Room TV channel and the biggest surprise was to see Sydney Mofamadi accompanied by Lindiwe Sisulu and one young Gentleman who was never introduced but you can see he was very important to her,” wrote the attendee. The document reads like a fantastical undercover thriller covert operation with several twists and turns but lacks contextual basis or any clear objective for the meeting. Top players in the document are former president Jacob Zuma, Minister of Social development Lindiwe Zulu and Human Settlements Deputy Minister David Mahlobo who is also a former minister of energy and minister of state security. “What I noticed during the meeting was the passion and the hate I saw from the language of Lindiwe Sisulu against Ayanda Dlodlo, David Mahlobo, DD Mabuza and the President himself Cyril Ramaphosa. I was caught by surprise how she (Zulu) says Ramaphosa should consider himself lucky to have her trying to save him but she knows that Ayanda, David and DD Mabuza should be removed from Cyril cabinet as they are not adding any value and that Ramaphosa should consider himself lucky to be where he is and anytime they can remove him. We all thought she was joking but to our surprise she didn’t withdraw such comments which made me question who we were dealing with here. That is when I became uncomfortable with the whole process and the meeting,” wrote the Attendee. According to an analysis of the largely “muddled and incoherent” document, Zulu and Zuma receive the highest ratio of negative sentiment in the document while Mahlobo is projected as a “victim of some plots and a clean person''. “The reason I am talking is because it seems these people target the Zuma group but also want Ramaphosa to fall ... I am asking myself what’s the real aim of this project, is it to nail Zuma and sacrifice Ramaphosa at the same time? The country is under siege as the two factions are fighting till death. Do I want to be part of it, the answer to that one is a big no,”  said the Attendee. The document mentions various other players in the Zuma and Ramaphosa camps who are also implicated in the state security drama currently being heard at the Zondo Commission of Inquiry into State Capture. These individuals include Brian Molefe, Mo Shaik, Sydney Mufumadi, Ayanda Dlodlo, Loyiso Jafta and Neil Barnard among others. Daily News 