Durban - Minister of Higher Education and Training Blade Nzimande said students who were not able to complete the 2020 academic year would be given an opportunity to do so. Nzimande said 2020 was a challenging year for university students and staff and this year would see the completion of the 2020 academic year and the start of the new academic year. “Significant efforts have been made across all institutions to ensure that a fair opportunity has been provided to all students to complete the 2020 academic year.” The minister said the department would continue to monitor institutions to keep track of academic and health and safety matters. Nzimande said in light of the adjusted level 3 restrictions being implemented, he had recently received plans for the completion of the 2020 academic year from all institutions. He said while many institutions had completed their programmes, some were currently still completing their programmes and providing catch-up opportunities for students. “In some institutions assessments and practicals are still to be completed and in others, supplementary exams are already under way.” All institutions are following different academic plans due to different requirements and conditions, he said. Ten institutions completed the 2020 academic programme in January, while 16 institutions have not yet completed and would have until March to wrap up. The minister called on these institutions to communicate the roll-out of their schedule to students and relevant stakeholders. Nzimande said all students who receive bursaries from the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) would continue to receive their 2020 allowances until the academic year is completed. He said most of the universities, especially those which have not finished, are partially or fully open. The Minister said the Department has not imposed the Covid-19 restriction of 66% capacity of students at institutions. He said the department has requested each institution to come up with a plan to maintain social distancing and all the health protocols. “These are adults that we are dealing with, so that you are able to ensure that we finish the academic year as we save lives as well.” Nzimande said the department was monitoring the situation very closely with the Department of Health to ensure that they are able to deal with the pandemic. “Where there are huge infections, we will take action to close. We have told management that they should also do so.” The minister also appealed to matric pupils and their parents not to panic over the change in schedule caused by the second wave. “Our universities have planned in such a way that they will open way after the matric results have been announced, so that all those who have been writing matric would have an opportunity to be admitted to our universities.” Last week, the Department of Basic Education announced that schools would reopen on February 15, more than two weeks after the scheduled return date. The minister said while there have been calls to reopen the NSFAS application process, the department has decided against an allocation of more time as students were given four months to apply last year. He said NSFAS recorded over 750 000 applications for the 2021 academic year, which is a marked increase of approximately 185 000 applications. “Over 460 000 (or 61%) of the applicants are Sassa beneficiaries.” Nzimande added that students who do not make it into institutions due to space would be placed on the Central Applications Clearing House (Cach) system. The Cach acts as a “clearing house” or referral system for students who have applied for a space in a university or a college but have not successfully secured a space, he said. “These students can sign up for the Cach to receive career advice and referral to other opportunities in the PSET [Post-school education and training] system, including being referred to other universities that still have spaces in their area of interest, TVET college opportunities, artisan development opportunities and other possibilities within the PSET system.” 