Durban - A new draft identity management policy which proposes a modern integrated registry has been published by the Department of Home Affairs (DHA) for public comment. The department said the current National Population Register (NPR) uses unreliable lengthy manual paper-based processes that were designed in the 1980s. The draft was gazetted December 31. The new systems and operating model will be built around the new National Identity System (NIS) and linked to the systems for the civil registration of birth, nationality, citizenship, marriage and death. The department said it would also be linked to the Movement Control System and other immigration systems. “The NIS will enable the DHA to manage all its functions efficiently and responsively, as the NIS will link the identity of all citizens and other persons in a country to their civil and immigration statuses.” Currently, changes to identity and status that are made in immigration systems are only partially reflected in the NPR. According to the draft, the interfaces between systems would ensure data is accurate and continually updated in real time. “The goal of the modernisation programme is to build a Home Affairs that has replaced its legacy systems with multiple channels and integrated digital systems.” The smart ID card, fully digital ID and passport processes, online capture of biometrics at ports of entry and upgrades to the movement control and biometric systems are being rolled out. The department has also designed and installed an automated system for asylum seekers to make appointments at the Desmond Tutu Refugee Centre. A gap was identified in the present system in the registration of all births on to the NPR, which has caused vulnerable groups to face significant economic and social barriers as a result. This group includes people who did not acquire birth certificates at birth, children of non-citizens who were born in South Africa, those who are excluded or improperly documented for historical reasons such as the borderline communities and Khoisan people, and abandoned children. The new system proposes that every birth in the country, irrespective of the status of the parents, must be registered. At birth, the biometrics of a parent must be linked to the birth certificate of a child. “The identity number of a child must be processed on the basis of biographic information and linked to their parents’ identity numbers and mother’s biometric data.” In addition, a facial photograph must be taken for manual identification when needed. “Children must be re-registered when they reach age 5 with 10 fingerprints and iris and facial photographs.” The draft also states that new legislation and NIS must enable the registration of births for intersex children. In addition, it identified the legal age for people to apply for an ID is 16, which posed a serious risk because biometrics are only collected at this point. “This situation has been exploited by criminals, who steal birth certificates or use minors as an accomplice in criminal activities.” The public has until February 28 to make written submissions on the draft policy. To view the draft policy document go to the department’s website at www.dha.gov.za karen.singh@inl.co.za The Mercury