Durban - POLICE were yet to confirm their investigation into the alleged rape of a 5-year-old oThongathi girl after her alleged rapist was assaulted by an angry mob at the weekend. According to Reaction Unit South Africa, their security officers were on patrol when they saw the man being assaulted by the mob. Spokesperson Prem Balram said after investigation their officers established that the suspect had been consuming alcohol with a group of men in Newtown, Fairbreeze. “He then proceeded to the side of a building and after failing to return, the men went in search of him. They found him walking in their direction pulling up the zip on his pants. A child was also found on the side of the building with her underwear pulled down. While being questioned the suspect fled. A mob consisting of nearly 30 men pursued and apprehended him in Maidstone.” Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbele was still trying to confirm the incident and arrest with oThongathi police by yesterday afternoon. Meanwhile, on Friday the Empangeni Regional Court sentenced a 17-year-old man to 15 years imprisonment for the rape of a 6-year-old girl. Mbele said on June 11, 2018, the girl from Mkhoma Reserve in Empangeni, was playing at her neighbour’s house when the 17-year-old boy forced her to enter a room and raped her. “The victim’s aunt went to look for her and found the accused in bed with the little girl. The victim informed her aunt that the accused had raped her. A case of rape was opened at Empangeni police station and the docket was transferred to Empangeni Family Violence, Child Protection and Sexual Offences Unit for further investigation. The accused was arrested and made several court appearances until he was found guilty by Empangeni Regional Court on January 20,” said Mbele. KwaZulu-Natal Provincial Commissioner Lieutenant-General Khombinkosi Jula hailed all those involved in securing the prison sentence. “The sentence will send a clear message to other young people who believe they can commit crime and get away because of their age. They must know that once you break the law you are a criminal and you will be treated like one,” he said. Daily News 