Durban - The family of a Durban University of Technology (DUT) student who was stabbed to death, allegedly by another student at a university residence last week, are calling for justice for their son. Thabiso Mhlongo was stabbed to death, allegedly during an argument, at the Sterling House residence in Grey Street in Durban. Provincial police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala confirmed the incident. Gwala said the 19-year-old Mhlongo sustained a stab wound on the left side of the neck and was declared dead at the scene by paramedics. “The suspect fled the scene after the incident and is being sought by police. A case of murder is being investigated by Durban Central SAPS,” said Gwala. Mhlongo’s mother, Thandeka Mhlongo, said the family were shocked by his murder. “What really hurt me the most is that the suspect is known. He is a student as well, and we wonder why he is still out there. The only thing that will give me peace and make me accept his death is when the killer faces justice,” said Thandeka. She said that when she got a call about the incident, she could not believe what she was told. “As his mother, I’m not okay. This is hard to take in and it’s hard to accept,” she said. The 19-year-old was a second-year human resource student. His mother described him as a quiet and very smart person who loved his books and making jokes. “He was a good student, very smart, was always indoors. He was good in his studies ... In his first year, he got more than five distinctions. “As a mother, I knew he was going places with his life and he was going to change and better our situation here at home,” said an emotional Thandeka. The university confirmed the criminal incident and said it was alleged that the students were fighting in a room when the stabbing occurred. DUT media officer Simangele Zuma said the residence adviser and paramedics were called to the scene. Zuma said that Mhlongo was part of the group of students who had already returned to the institution’s residences. “A total of 8709 students still require access to campus for practical assessments and laboratory work to complete the 2020 academic year. This is 25.6% of the total student body,” said Zuma. The Mercury