Durban - A second Ezemvelo KZN wildlife resort has been closed down in just over a week due to staff testing positive for Covid-19. This follows the closure of the Hilltop Resort in the Hluhluwe iMfolozi Game Park on January 2 after a manager tested positive. Giant’s Castle Resort, in the central part of the Maloti-Drakensberg Park World Heritage Site, about three hours from Durban, closed immediately on Saturday after two staff members tested positive. As a result, the temporary introduction of new housekeeping protocols were introduced by Ezemvelo for all its resorts. Ezemvelo spokesperson Musa Mntambo said the protocols were an attempt to reduce the possibility of either the guests or employees contacting Covid-19 within its resorts. “Ezemvelo took this drastic decision following the closure of the Giant’s Castle Resort due to two of its staff members testing positive for Covid-19,” he said. Mntambo said the results of five other employees with Covid-19 symptoms were expected to be received today. These employees have been in repeated direct contact with all 24 employees at Giant's Castle Resort he said. “This necessitated that the whole staff complement of Giant’s Castle goes on self-isolation with immediate effect.” The Hilltop resort was scheduled to reopen last week after decontamination and the outstanding results of Covid-19 tests. However, a statement last Thursday confirmed that it would remain closed. Mntambo said one of the three results received on Wednesday were positive. Twelve test results were still outstanding. Mntambo said all guests who were booked from  January 7 to 15 would be informed of developments and given an option to transfer to any of Ezemvelo resorts or reschedule to any future date. “Refunds will be processed for those who may decide against either of the options recommended,” he said. At Giants Castle, Ezemvelo's Central Reservations have begun contacting all guests booked during the affected dates. The same options were given to guests, although refunds at Giants Castle may be used only as the last option said Ezemvelo. “Ezemvelo's Wellness team will also be informing all guests who might have had some form of direct contact with the affected employees during their stay at the Resort,” said Mntambo. Ezemvelo said both resorts would remain closed until January 15. The Hluhluwe iMfolozi Park remains open to the public every day between 6am and 6pm. The Mercury