Durban - A LEAKING nitrogen tank is believed to have caused the explosion at the Engen refinery south of Durban last month, the Department of Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs (EDTEA) has revealed. Residents of a nearby block of flats were evacuated after one of the flats on the highest floor caught alight following the explosion about 7am on December 4, 2020, although authorities have not yet been confirmed what caused the fire in the flat. Witnesses reported that they had seen something land on the roof of the block of flats which is located about 300 metres from the refinery, that is clearly visible from the block. Eleven-year-old Kiara Manuel, who was lying on her grandmother’s bed, sustained burn wounds to her ears, face and hands. Her grandmother, Jennifer Wilson, who was hanging up washing downstairs, rushed up to the flat when she heard the explosion at Engen. Neighbours pulled her out of the burning flat. She injured her hip when the men carried her out. Thirty-five residents were evacuated from the flats and the South Durban Community Environmental Alliance (SDCEA) handed over a memorandum of demands ordering Engen to provide data on its environmental and pollution control measures at the plant. EDTEA spokesperson Bheki Mbanjwa said that based ‌on‌ ‌the‌ ‌preliminary‌ ‌investigation‌ ‌and‌ ‌a site‌ ‌visit‌ ‌with‌ ‌the Department‌ ‌of‌ ‌Labour,‌ “‌it‌ ‌seems‌ ‌that‌ ‌a‌ nitrogen‌ ‌tank‌ ‌had‌ ‌a‌ ‌leak‌ ‌and‌ ‌ignited”.‌ ‌ “This‌ ‌then‌ ‌resulted‌ ‌in‌ ‌the‌ ‌explosion.‌ ‌It‌ ‌must‌ ‌be‌ ‌noted‌ ‌however‌ ‌that‌ ‌a‌ ‌full‌ ‌investigation‌ ‌will‌ ‌be‌ ‌undertaken,” Mbanjwa said. Asked what steps Engen needed to take with regard to pollution control and safety measures Mbanjwa said: “Engen‌ ‌must‌ ‌update‌ ‌their‌ ‌emergency‌ ‌management‌ ‌systems‌ ‌so‌ ‌as‌ ‌to‌ ‌ enable‌ ‌the‌ ‌facility‌ ‌to‌ ‌respond‌ ‌on‌ ‌time.‌ ‌The‌ ‌refinery‌ ‌must‌ ‌also‌ ‌ensure‌ ‌compliance‌ ‌ with‌ ‌the‌ ‌conditions‌ ‌of‌ ‌all‌ ‌authorisations‌ ‌and‌ ‌licences‌ ‌issued‌ ‌to‌ ‌them. “Engen‌ ‌needs‌ ‌to‌ ‌regularly‌ ‌monitor‌ ‌the‌ ‌integrity‌ ‌of‌ ‌the‌ ‌infrastructure‌ ‌and‌ ‌perform‌ ‌ stability‌ ‌testing‌ ‌of‌ ‌the‌ ‌tanks‌ ‌and‌ ‌other‌ ‌infrastructure‌ ‌containing‌ ‌hazardous‌ ‌and‌ ‌flammable‌ ‌material.” He said Engen had not been fined as the investigation was still ongoing. “We‌ ‌will‌ ‌await‌ ‌the‌ ‌finalisation‌ ‌of‌ ‌the‌ ‌full‌ ‌investigation‌ ‌whose‌ ‌findings‌ ‌will‌ ‌determine‌ ‌the‌ ‌next‌ ‌course‌ ‌of‌ ‌action,” Mbanjwa said. He added that Engen was “best placed to respond" to the question whether the fire victims would be compensated for their injuries and loss of property. Human Settlements spokesperson Mbulelo Baloyi said Engen had paid to accommodate the 35 victims of the fire at a local B&B for two weeks after the incident. “They are presently housed at Departmental Decant Units (Temporary Housing Units) situated within Austerville. The units are owned by the Human Settlements Department. We are using them to relocate families living in units that are currently being refurbished in Austerville. The 35 victims of the fire explosion will have their damaged block of flats repaired ahead of the other blocks," Baloyi said. SDCEA spokesperson Des D’Sa said the community had not received any information from the government or Engen in response to letters it had sent regarding the investigation and the future of the refinery. However, he said his organisation had met with Engen’s management who had agreed to appoint an independent facilitator to engage with it. Engen had not responded to questions sent last week at the time of publication. The Mercury