Durban - The KwaZulu-Natal’s Department of Education is sitting with an employee debt of nearly R600 million. This was revealed by the department in a written response to a Parliamentary question by the Democratic Alliance (DA) last week. In a response, signed by the KZN Education MEC Kwazi Mshengu, and Head of Department, Dr Enoch Nzama, it showed that a staggering R593 511 897.45 is currently owed to the department. The KZN DA spokesperson on Education, Dr Imran Keeka said that this is a figure which equates to 25% of the department’s total number of 100 000 employees in KZN. Keeka said that the figures do not come as a surprise to them, given the manner in which the department has been run for years. He said if the department had prevented this, there would have been more money to fix hundreds of collapsing school roofs and pit latrines in the province. “With almost R550 million, the result of ex-employee debt, the DA will be taking steps to find out how this was allowed to happen. Meanwhile, the 70 826 state guarantee debtors also mean that the department is trying to recover money from people erroneously paid after leaving their employ,” said Keeka. According to the department, there were about 605 cases, totalling R8.4 million, where individuals owing the department have defaulted on payments during the last three months. The department said this is due to leave without pay, late terminations and tax debts “The districts have been advised to hold monthly meetings with the human resources, finance, and circuit manager to deal with late terminations, documentation not being submitted on time and other issues affecting debtors,” said the department. Mshengu and Nzama said they were unable to provide a time-frame for the recovery of debt, as the bulk of the debt was over three years and some debts are from even as far back as 2004. They said, for the employees that were in service, the debt was being recovered monthly through their salaries. Keeka said they believed that all individuals who owe the department money need to sign an acknowledgement of debt, binding them to repay the money in whatever terms of the agreement reached. The Mercury