Durban - The failure of the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Health to meet its own deadline of opening the state of the art Dr Pixley Ka Seme Hospital has been condemned by labour unions. The hospital was meant to be open in June 2019 after the construction began in 2015. The Public Servants Association of South Africa PSA, KZN manager Mlungisi Ndlovu, said the hospital should have been open long ago to relieve pressure from other nearby facilities. Ndlovu said the KZN Health MEC Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu should hold the Head of Department accountable for the delay. “There is a delay from the side of the Human Resource and that is unacceptable. We are in the middle of dealing with the second wave and there are speculations that we might also experience a third and fourth wave,” said Ndlovu. Currently, over 1.5 million residents from KwaMashu, Phoneix, Nanda and Ntuzuma are battling overcrowding at Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Hospital. Ndlovu said they were calling for the department to open the R2.8-billion facility by  March 1, adding that it was concerning that the posts advertised five months ago had not yet been filled. “It’s unacceptable. A proper workforce plan should have been completed long ago to deal with the high number of applicants. This is just risking the lives of people, and they should be employing people as communities are unemployed,” he said. Explaining the details around the hospital, Simelane-Zulu said the delays were caused by the lockdown, as the contractor battled to procure the material ordered in March last year. Simelane-Zulu said in May, the hospital was completed, and there were over 450 hospital beds that were ready to be utilised. “Around August, we then started with the recruitment of hospital management, and that process has been concluded. At the end of September, we started the recruitment of everyone that will be employed,” she said, adding there won’t be any contractors employed in the hospital. She said there was a bigger chunk of non-clinical staff that was still needed in the hospital. According to the department, the hospital has more than 1 400 vacancies, and the majority of those were non-clinical. “Non-clinical applications that we have received thus far are more than 200 000 and that is a huge number. This includes security guards, cleaners, gardeners, clerks and everyone. That is a tedious process that is currently being conducted. We have, however, started a process of capturing all the applicants. More data captures have been employed to deal with the high volume of the applicants as our existing staff was not sufficient.” Simelane-Zulu said the capturing was going to be done day and night, and immediately after that process has been completed, the short-listing process would start. She said they were going to make use of the facility to conduct interviews. “Our plan is that by March 1, we will have all the people shortlisted, interviewed, and on-site. They will then have about a month of induction that is set to be for a month and after that, we will have the official opening,” said Simelane-Zulu. The Mercury