Durban - Civil society organisations have called for transparency and accountability in the handling of the R128 million pledged by businesses to the Gender-Based Violence and Femicide (GBVF) fund in South Africa. President Cyril Ramaphosa launched the GBVF fund last week, together with the International Women’s Forum of South Africa and social partners. A range of companies participated in the launch and pledged a total of R128 170 000 in contributions to the private-sector-led, multi-sectoral fund that will support the implementation of the National Strategic Plan (NSP), a roadmap to ending GBVF. The President said the funding came at a time of great economic difficulty which contributed to the hardship and vulnerability affecting women. “It is an important contribution to improving the lives of women and girls in our society.” Ramaphosa said all GBVF survivors would be able to access efficient and sensitive criminal justice that was quick, accessible, responsive and gender-inclusive. The Call To Action Collective, a grouping of approximately 70 civil society organisations and activists, stated they worked throughout the months following the #TotalShutDown in March in 2018 to consult, mobilise, and build consensus towards the Presidential summit on GBVF in November 2018. The collective’s spokesperson, Mandisa Khanyile, said pervasive, chronic and normalised levels of GBVF have continued to be a defining feature of South African society, despite many years of advocacy, activism, civil society interventions and programmes and legislative reforms. “While the establishment of the fund is a step in the right direction, we want to caution both the private and public sector against leaving civil society organisations out of discussions about the structure and function of the GBVF fund. We believe that civil society holds a wealth of information on the provision of services, responding to the need and creating a continued response to GBV. “We seek clarity on how the secretariat will be constituted and the criteria which will be used for funding distribution. We look forward to working with the GBVF fund to ensure that patriarchy is dismantled and GBV is eradicated in all spheres of society. “Moving forward will require civil society to maintain oversight that will ensure accountability, transparency and coordination. We do not want to see something similar to what happened with Covid-19 and PPE. We don’t want resources mismanaged,” Khanyile said. zainul.dawood@inl.co.za Daily News