Durban - eThekwini municipality councillors want the City to stop treating business forums with “kid gloves”, saying this has failed to yield positive results. They said the practice of the City’s leadership meeting with these forums when they make threats, should stop. Executive committee members from across the political divide said the city had “coddled” the forums for too long and a tougher stance was needed. The general feeling among the parties was that the council had made a mistake by “entertaining the demands” of business forums. Mayor Mxolisi Kaunda said the municipality was concerned about the activities of business forums, and the recent actions of one forum had resulted in refuse collection in uMlazi being stalled. Earlier this month a business forum intimidated Durban Solid Waste workers, forcing the City to withdraw its workers and leaving refuse uncollected in uMlazi for more than two weeks, which drew the the ire of residents. Kaunda has said that the municipality was drafting a strategy to deal with business forums. “The piling up of rubbish is not just a health hazard for the people of uMlazi but it is also depriving them of the service,” he said. He said the City had resolved not to engage with the forums going forward. “When the council developed a strategy to resume refuse collection we decided not to engage with this forum; that would be like us asking them for permission to do our work.” He added that the council wanted workers to feel safe. “These people come around to depots and threaten workers, saying they are going to kill them because they know where they live,” he said. Kaunda said the actions of business forums put pressure on the City’s budget as it had to call on metro police to intervene when such incidents occurred. He said the residents of uMlazi should play their role in ensuring the cleanliness of the area by taking out refuse on  collection days. DA  councillor Thabani Mthethwa said: “The issue of lawlessness in the city is something we have not been paying attention to for a long time. When these people engage in this thuggish behaviour we go and sit with them. It is quite clear that is not working.” IFP councillor Mdu Nkosi said the City should adopt a tough approach when dealing with such forums as they  disrupted service delivery. “Those disrupting the service in Umlazi, it seems that if we treat them with kid gloves; they will continue. We are talking about the health hazard in uMlazi; the people in uMlazi have been faced with this situation for a long time. “City officials have said that dealing decisively with business forums will create confidence amongst investors,  and stability,” he said. The Mercury