Durban - The resignation of eThekwini Municipality’s deputy mayor Belinda Scott was announced during the City’s executive committee on Wednesday. Scott is leaving little more than a year after she was appointed to the position. Scott, who was in the meeting, did not address the issue. She joined the council in October 2019, with Kaunda and Weziwe Thusi. They were brought in to bring stability in the council because the ANC feared eThekwini, then led by mayor Zandile Gumede, was teetering on the brink of collapse. The ANC KwaZulu-Natal provincial office said that officials had accepted the request from Scott to resign from her current responsibilities as an ANC councillor. The party said in a statement that during her deployment to the municipality Scott had informed provincial officials that her plans to pursue PHD studies and a career in the private sector were at an advanced stage. “As a cadre of our movement she accepted the decision of the organisation and committed to have her personal plans deferred to the extent that it was possible. The provincial officials have since reconsidered her representation relating to these matters a few weeks ago and decided that comrade Belinda should be permitted to pursue her stated desires.” The ANC said it conveyed its gratitude to Scott for her selfless service to the residents of the municipality. “Comrade Belinda Scott remains a loyal member of the ANC will continue to lead the PEC (provincial executive committee) sub committee on Legal and Monitoring.” Sources in and out of the ANC suggested yesterday that Scott’s direct manner had not endeared her to her caucus and she struggled to gel with the members. A source said the ANC eThekwini caucus had several factions and Scott’s leadership style had not been well received by some members. DA councillor Nicole Graham said the resignation was not a surprise. “There have been a lot of running battles in that ANC caucus and factions, and I certainly don’t think she has found herself popular among her colleagues. “Since she started there has been greater transparency with regard to finances, but I don't think that overall we have made huge strides (in improving the municipality). The point is that it’s not a role of any one person when the entire organisation is rotten from the bottom to the top. “I have certainly worked with far worse ANC councillors than councillor Scott. She certainly is a hard-working person, but overall the issue is that one or two people are certainly not going to change anything,”  Graham said. IFP councillor Mdu Nkosi said the resignation was surprising. “They were brought in October 2019 on the mandate to ’clean’ the municipality. We are now worried. What is so hot that has caused the deputy mayor to jump ship?” Nkosi said the party was worried about the state of the municipality. “I have been a councillor since 2006, and in all these years the situation has never been like this. From  a distance one can clearly see there is something very wrong in the municipality. The Mercury