Durban - As the Department of Basic Education outlined its preparedness to accommodate millions of pupils expected back in schools today, teachers’ unions are crying foul, saying some schools still lack the basic health necessities to keep safe from Covid-19 infections. Basic Education Minister Angie Motshekga and department director-general Mathanzima Mweli gave a detailed briefing on the state of readiness on Sunday. They said all public schools would reopen for pupils on Monday, however some schools would continue to use a calendar that alternates classes and grades on different days to comply with issues of social distancing. Motshekga said personal protective equipment (PPE), textbooks and stationery were all in place to ensure that pupils have a safe and productive return to schools. The scholar transport and nutrition programmes were also ready to resume. Extracting from her report the level of preparedness of schools in KwaZulu-Natal, it showed that all of the schools in KwaZulu-Natal, about 6 000 of them, had reopened earlier this month for teachers and school management. But some teacher unions in the province said not all was in place, as some schools had not received their PPE. Motshekga’s report revealed that schools in KwaZulu-Natal had been ordered to accommodate pupils that had dropped out last year. “The province wants to help all pupils who need admissions in 2021. The province has informed schools that they must accommodate all their former pupils who dropped out in 2020. “Those who dropped out will be admitted if they return to register in 2021 However, these pupils will be registered in grades where they were in in 2020. In a week after the schools have opened, all districts will be requested to provide a list of dropouts who have been admitted,” it said. The report revealed that about 1 200 teachers across the country have died due to Covid-19 since last year, with about 159 in between December and January. The majority of the deaths came from Limpopo and KwaZulu-Natal. In KZN, 196 teachers and 37 support staff succumbed to Covid-19. KZN has about 101 000 teachers and about 96 000 have returned to work. On the registration of KZN pupils, the minister said this had gone well, with the exception of a few shortcomings as some parents had not registered their children a year in advance. About 209 010 Grade 1 pupils have been placed and  110  were awaiting placement. For Grade 8, about 226 350 pupils had been placed and 196 were waiting placement. On the provision of water, the report said a meeting held between Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, KZN MEC for Education and municipal mayors, resolved that municipalities should continue to provide water to schools. KZN municipalities committed to continue with the delivery of water to 3 877 schools and to build internal capacity where capacity shortage was identified. National Professional Teachers' Organisation of South Africa (Naptosa) chief executive Thirona Moodley, said reports from members indicated that not all schools had received all PPE, including sanitisers and detergents. “We are aware that deliveries have been made to the districts but they are yet to be delivered to the schools. We also have had reports that masks delivered were the incorrect sizes and will have to be returned. This will cause further delays. “Water tanks in some schools need replacing as they have been of poor quality. Naptosa also notes that staffing may be an issue in some schools, as KZN staff have succumbed to the virus and the substitutes must be in schools tomorrow if teaching and learning is going to start on day 1. “Naptosa will want to, as far as possible, see minimum interruptions to this academic year. We are aware that the virus is going to be with us for at least the rest of the year and we must make the most of available resources to make this a meaningful academic year, while still keeping our learners and school staff safe,” she said. Sadtu provincial secretary Nomarashiya Caluza said: “We are happy with the emphasis on health and that a school that is not ready, meaning a school that does not comply, must delay reopening. “The state of readiness in paper differs with realities on the ground ... last week some schools had not received PPE’s ... We will see as we visit schools (today). Many school vacancies have not been filled,” she said. The Mercury