DURBAN - Following a successful first exhibition that saw 68 artworks sold by 20 local artists over the festive season, the newly opened The Gallery in Ballito’s Lifestyle Centre opens its second exhibition on Friday. Jane Digby, a local artist and the driving force behind The Gallery, now in its fifth week of existence, said the first exhibition received an incredible response from the community on the North Coast and holidaymakers. “This is a magnificent, contemporary gallery that is conducive to optimally displaying art as well as browsing,” she said. The second exhibition, “Contagious Creativity”, runs until March 9 and features mixed media work by creatives from across KZN. The opening will be staggered throughout the day to limit the number of guests in the space at any one time. Digby said the opening would also feature pop up performances, installations, a fashion show and music. “A call for artists was distributed in December, calling on creatives to apply digitally for selection and inclusion in this new exhibition, showcasing the talent KZN has to offer. We selected artworks that will create a visually exciting exhibition experience, with the intention that it will remain a lasting memory that will create engagement in the arts as well as bring hope at this time of adversity,” she said. She said a wide range of arts, design, creative writing and music would be showcased, including paintings, drawings, print, mixed media, photography, sculpture, multimedia, fashion and furniture. There will also be an award-winning architectural project and woven ware. Meanwhile, Phansi Museum in Glenwood is busy with the final stages of a project that would see enthusiasts exploring the museum on their computers and mobile devices from the comfort of their homes. Spokesperson Paul Mikula said in light of Covid-19, it was decided to transform the museum to adapt to the new conditions which have affected most museums around the world. “We are currently migrating toward a digital presence. Keep your eyes glued to our social media pages for more information. In the meantime, our staff will mostly be working from home. They will, however, rotate to come in to look after the Ubuntu Art collection.” He said their African Art Centre was not affected and remained open from 9am until 4pm. Their artist in residence, internationally recognised potter Phumlani Nyawo, will continue running his classes. Daily News